change(doc): Document state format upgrade implementation and testing (#7799)
ZcashFoundation/zebra: book/src/dev/state-db-upgrades.md

# Zebra Cached State Database Implementation

## Current Implementation

### Verification Modes
[verification]: #verification

Zebra's state has two verification modes:
- block hash checkpoints, and
- full verification.

This means that verification uses two different codepaths, and they must produce the same results.

By default, Zebra uses as many checkpoints as it can, because they are more secure against rollbacks
(and some other kinds of chain attacks). Then it uses full verification for the last few thousand
blocks.

When Zebra gets more checkpoints in each new release, it checks the previously verified cached
state against those checkpoints. This checks that the two codepaths produce the same results.

## Upgrading the State Database
[upgrades]: #upgrades

For most state upgrades, we want to modify the database format of the existing database. If we
change the major database version, every user needs to re-download and re-verify all the blocks,
which can take days.

### Writing Blocks to the State
[write-block]: #write-block

> Zebra's state has two methods of getting to the latest format:
> - syncing from empty with the latest format, and
> - upgrading from a previous format to the latest format.
> 
> This means that writing blocks uses two different codepaths, and they must produce the same results.

Reviewer: Optional/Nitpick: I think "both must produce the same results" should go in the first line of this section.

```suggestion
Blocks can be written to the database via two different code paths, and both must produce the same results:

- Upgrading pre-existing zebra-state databases/cache to the latest format
- Writing newly-synced blocks in the latest format

```

This code is high risk, because discovering bugs is tricky, and fixing bugs can require a full reset
and re-write of an entire column family.

Most Zebra instances will do an upgrade, because they already have a cached state, and upgrades are
faster. But we run a full sync in CI every week, because new users use that codepath. (And it is
their first experience of Zebra.)

When Zebra starts up and shuts down (and periodically in CI tests), we run checks on the state
format. This makes sure that the two codepaths produce the same state on disk.

To reduce code and testing complexity:
- when a previous Zebra version opens a newer state, the entire state is considered to have that lower version, and
- when a newer Zebra version opens an older state, each required upgrade is run on the entire state.

### In-Place Upgrade Goals
[upgrade-goals]: #upgrade-goals

Here are the goals of in-place upgrades:
- avoid a full download and rebuild of the state

> - the previous state format must be able to be loaded by the new state

Reviewer: Nitpick/Optional:

```suggestion
- Zebra's state must be able to upgrade data from the previous major version of its disk format
  and load data from the previous minor or patch versions of its disk format
```

Author: Thank you for the detailed review and feedback!

This really good feedback, even though it is not quite right - that means we need to clearly document the current behaviour.

```suggestion
- Zebra must be able to upgrade the format from previous minor or patch versions of its disk format
  (Major disk format versions are breaking changes. They create a new empty state and re-sync the whole chain.)
```

# Zebra Cached State Database Implementation

## Current Implementation

### Verification Modes
[verification]: #verification

Zebra's state has two verification modes:
- block hash checkpoints, and
- full verification.

This means that verification uses two different codepaths, and they must produce the same results.

By default, Zebra uses as many checkpoints as it can, because they are more secure against rollbacks
(and some other kinds of chain attacks). Then it uses full verification for the last few thousand
blocks.

When Zebra gets more checkpoints in each new release, it checks the previously verified cached
state against those checkpoints. This checks that the two codepaths produce the same results.

## Upgrading the State Database
[upgrades]: #upgrades

For most state upgrades, we want to modify the database format of the existing database. If we
change the major database version, every user needs to re-download and re-verify all the blocks,
which can take days.

### Writing Blocks to the State
[write-block]: #write-block

Blocks can be written to the database via two different code paths, and both must produce the same results:

> - Upgrading pre-existing zebra-state databases/cache to the latest format

Reviewer 2: ###### Optional Suggestion

Could we simplify this line to something like:

```suggestion
- Upgrading a pre-existing database to the latest format
```

Author: Sure!

Some format bugs can't be fixed, and require an entire rebuild of the state. For example, deleting
or corrupting transactions or block headers.

So testing format upgrades is extremely important. Every state format upgrade should test:
- new format serializations
- new calculations or data processing
- the upgrade produces a valid format
- a full sync produces a valid format

Together, the tests should cover every code path. For example, the subtrees needed mid-block,
end-of-block, sapling, and orchard tests. They mainly used the validity checks for coverage.

Each test should be followed by a restart, a sync of 200+ blocks, and another restart. This
simulates typical user behaviour.

And ideally:
- An upgrade from the earliest supported Zebra version
  (the CI sync-past-checkpoint tests do this on every PR)

#### Manually Triggering a Format Upgrade
[manual-upgrade]: #manual-upgrade

Zebra stores the current state minor and patch versions in a `version` file in the database
directory. This path varies based on the OS, major state version, network, and config.

For example, the default mainnet state version on Linux is at:
`~/.cache/zebra/state/v25/mainnet/version`

> To upgrade from `v25.0.0`, delete the version file.

Reviewer: Nitpick/Optional:

```suggestion
To upgrade a cached Zebra state from `v25.0.0` to the latest disk format, delete the version file.
```

To upgrade from a specific version `v25.x.y`, edit the file so it contains `x.y`.

> Editing the file will trigger a re-upgrade over an existing state. Re-upgrades can hide format bugs.
> For example, if the old code was correct, and the new code skips blocks, the validity checks won't
> find that bug.

Reviewer: Optional/Nitpick:

```suggestion
Editing the file and running Zebra will trigger a re-upgrade over an existing state.
Re-upgrades can hide format bugs. For example, if the old code was correct, and the
new code skips blocks, the validity checks won't find that bug.
```

  - Each key-value entry is created once.
  - Keys can be deleted, but values are never updated.
  - Code called by ReadStateService must ignore deleted keys, or use a read lock.

>   - We avoid deleting keys, and avoid using iterators on Delete column families, for performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - We avoid deleting keys, and avoid using iterators on `Delete` column families, for performance.
```
